The Association for Information Systems (AIS) is an international, not-for-profit, professional association with the stated mission to serve society through the advancement of knowledge and the promotion of excellence in the practice and study of information systems. Membership is made up primarily of academic educators, researchers, and institutions that specialize in information systems (IS) development, implementation, and evaluation. The association has members in more than 90 countries, and is led by a president who is annually elected from one of three world regions—the Americas, Europe and Africa, and Asia-Pacific—on a rotating basis. The governing Council is made up of elected functional vice-presidents and other officers and council members who are elected in the three world regions. The association organizes two annual conferences for IS researchers, educators, and students: The International Conference on Information Systems (I.C.I.S.), which alternates between the three world regions, and the Americas Conference For Information Systems (AMCIS), which is located at different sites in North, Central, and South America. The Association publishes academic journals including:
Journal of the Association for Information Systems (JAIS)
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems (SJIS)
Revista Latinoamericana Y Del Caribe De La Associacion De Sistemas De Informacion (RELCASI)
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems (PAJAIS)
Journal of the Midwest Association for Information Systems (JMWAIS)
Journal of Information Technology Theory and Application (JITTA)
Communications of the Association for Information Systems (CAIS)
AIS Transactions on Replication Research (TRR)
AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction (THCI)
Affiliated journals include:
Business & Information Systems Engineering (BISE)
Management Information Systems Quarterly (MISQ)
MIS Quarterly Executive (MISQe)
Information Systems Journal (ISJ)
Systèmes d'Information et Management (SIM)
Foundations and Trends in Information Systems (FnTIS)
Both AIS published titles and affiliated journals are included in the AIS eLibrary, which is accessible as a benefit of membership.[1]


== Leo Award ==
Since 1999 the AIS annually grants the Leo Award to one or more persons, who have made exceptional contributions to the research and practice of Information Systems. Award recipient have been:
1999 : C. West Churchman, J. Daniel Couger, Börje Langefors, Enid Mumford
2000 : Gordon B. Davis
2001 : Richard O. Mason
2002 : Jay Nunamaker, Paul Gray
2003 : Frank Land, John F. Rockart
2004 : William R. King, Rob Kling
2005 : Andrew B. Whinston
2006 : Niels Bjørn-Andersen, Phillip Ein-Dor
2007 : Izak Benbasat, Ephraim McLean
2008 : Dewald Roode, M. Lynne Markus, Robert W. Zmud, Kenneth L. Kraemer
2009 : Daniel Robey, E. Burton Swanson
2010 : Blake Ives, Carol Saunders
2011 : Richard (Rick) Watson, Ron Weber
2012 : Bob Galliers, Detmar Straub
2013 : Rudy Hirschheim, Kalle Lyytinen


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website