A speech corpus (or spoken corpus) is a database of speech audio files and text transcriptions. In Speech technology, speech corpora are used, among other things, to create acoustic models (which can then be used with a speech recognition engine). In Linguistics, spoken corpora are used to do research into phonetic, conversation analysis, dialectology and other fields.
A corpus is one such database. Corpora is the plural of corpus (i.e. it is many such databases).
There are two types of Speech Corpora:
Read Speech - which includes:
Book excerpts
Broadcast news
Lists of words
Sequences of numbers

Spontaneous Speech - which includes:
Dialogs - between two or more people (includes meetings);
Narratives - a person telling a story (one such corpus is the Buckeye Corpus);
Map-tasks - one person explains a route on a map to another;
Appointment-tasks - two people try to find a common meeting time based on individual schedules.

A special kind of speech corpora are non-native speech databases that contain speech with foreign accent.


== See also ==
Transcription (linguistics)
EXMARaLDA
Praat
Transcriber
TIMIT
Spoken English Corpus
The BABEL Speech Corpus
List of children's speech corpora
Non-native speech database
Arabic Speech Corpus


== References ==
Edwards, Jane / Lampert, Martin (eds.) (1992): Talking Data – Transcription and Coding in Discourse Research. Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Leech, Geoffrey / Myers, Greg / Thomas, Jenny (eds.) (1995): Spoken English on Computer: Transcription, Markup and Application. Harlow: Longman.


== External links ==
Santa Barbara Corpus of Spoken American English
Buckeye Corpus The Buckeye Corpus of Conversational Speech
Spoken Language Corpora at the Research Center on Multilingualism
The Spoken Turkish Corpus at METU Ankara
Spoken Corpus Klient with the Corp-Oral Corpus at ILTEC Lisbon
VoxForge - open source speech corpora
OLAC: Open Language Archives Community
BAS Bavarian Archive for Speech Signals
Simmortel Speech Recognition Corpus for Indian English and Hindi
ELRA: the European Language Resources Association
The PELCRA Conversational Corpus of Polish
The Arabic Speech Corpus